Welcome my friend to
today's lecture on puzzles.
Let's unpack the mystery of
this concept without needing a
PhD or a panic attack concept.
Explanation.
Puzzles in reasoning ability are
logic-based problems that require
you to arrange people, objects, or
information based on a given set of clues.
These problems are designed to test your
analytical thinking, deductive reasoning,
and the ability to process multiple
pieces of information simultaneously to
arrive at a unique and correct solution.
They often involve scenarios
like seating arrangements.
Floor allocations, scheduling
events, or categorizing individuals
based on various attributes.
The core task is to identify and
establish relationships between
different entities as described by
the clues, real world relevance.
These skills are highly relevant,
especially for professional
roles that require analytical
thinking and decision making.
For resource allocation banks optimize
staff funds and technology just like
arranging puzzle pieces efficiently
in fraud detection, spotting unusual
patterns in financial data to identify
and prevent fraudulent activities is
truly like solving a complex data puzzle.
For customer problem solving.
Diagnosing complex client issues
means logically connecting various
symptoms and fragmented information,
and for logistics and scheduling,
organizing loan approvals or meeting
schedules requires precise arrangement
akin to solving a time-based puzzle.
See how practical this is my friend.
Breakdown of question types
based on past year exam patterns.
The most frequently recurring puzzle
formats include seating arrangement,
linear, circular, square, rectangular,
about 35 to 40% of puzzle questions.
These involve arranging individuals
in specific formations based
on their relative positions and
directions, floor or box puzzles.
Approximately 25 to 30% of puzzle
questions require assigning persons or
items to different floors of a building
or stacking boxes, one above another.
Scheduling puzzles, day,
month, year, time-based.
About 15 to 20% of puzzle questions
require arranging events or persons
on specific days of the week, months
of the year, or at particular times.
Categorization puzzles.
Approximately five to 10% of
puzzle questions involve matching
different variables like people,
professions, cities, or colors,
using a systematic tabular approach.
Blood relation puzzles often combined
and around 5% of puzzle questions
establish family relationships, sometimes
integrated with seating arrangements
and comparison or ranking puzzles.
Also, approximately 5% of puzzle questions
involve comparing individuals based
on attributes like height, weight, or
age to determine their relative ranks.
Formulas plus tricks puzzles.
Don't rely on mathematical formulas,
my friend, but on logical deduction.
Pure and simple key tricks to master.
First visual mapping.
Always create a diagram table or
simple sketch to represent the
given information and relationships.
Second, apply fixed clues first.
Start by placing information
that is definite and unambiguous.
These are your crucial anchor points.
Third, don't ignore negative information
statements about what is not true.
Example, X is not next to Y are absolutely
crucial for eliminating possibilities.
Fourth, master linking clues.
Identify connections between
different pieces of information that
help build the overall solution.
And finally, pay close attention to
boundary conditions close, referring
to ends in linear, top, bottom, in
flows, or specific day or time slots.
Limit options significantly.
Remember these and your
golden methods of solving.
Now, my friend.
Let's talk about the actual battle plan,
the methods of solving these puzzles.
The Tabulation method is best for
puzzles with multiple variables.
Example, people, their cities, their
professions, and their favorite colors.
You create a grid with rows and columns
representing variables and fill it by
marking confirmed relationships with a
check mark and impossible ones with an X.
Then there's the diagrammatic
mac for seating arrangements.
Draw lines for linear circles for
circular and square or rectangular
shapes for those arrangements.
For floor puzzles, draw a vertical
stack of numbered floors for scheduling.
Draw a calendar like structure.
Visuals are key, right?
The elimination method is powerful.
As you process each glue cross out
possibilities that contradict the
given information, this systematically
reduces the solution space.
When a clue presents multiple equally
probable scenarios, use the case
building method, create separate
diagrams or tables for each case.
Continue solving each case independently
until only one remains consistent with
all clues and the ultimate superpower.
Deductive reasoning.
This is where you combine two or more
seemingly unrelated clues to infer
new information or relationships
that are not explicitly stated.
This my friend, is the absolute.
Core skill in solving complex puzzles,
shortcuts, and smart techniques.
Now, for some pros, my friend, the
shortcuts and smart techniques that
can make you a puzzle solving champion.
Always start with a first read through.
Scan all clues, once to grasp
the overall context and identify
the most restrictive clues.
Example, X lives on the topmost floor.
Then a crucial point, prioritize
definite over relative information.
Always begin with clues that directly
state positions or relationships
before tackling relative ones.
Example, X is to the left of Y. Follow
a systematic processing approach.
Address one clue at a time.
After integrating a clue, cross it off.
This prevents rereading and
ensures all information is used.
Be a detective and look for chains.
Identify sequences of relative clues.
Example, A is next to B. B is next
to C to quickly form blocks of people
or items for circular arrangements.
Employ the clever fix
and rotate technique.
Pick one person and fix their position.
Then place others relative to them.
The beauty is the final solution
can be rotated later if needed.
And finally, the most
important shortcut of all.
Practice with timer.
Consistent practice under timed
conditions is essential to improve
both your speed and your accuracy.
No shortcuts around that, my friend.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Beware these common pitfalls, my friend.
First misinterpreting directions.
Confusing, left right, especially
in circular arrangements where
some individuals may face the
center and others outwards.
Always clarify the reference point.
Second adjacent versus next to assuming.
Next to always means immediately adjacent.
Often it implies immediate adjacency
unless context suggests otherwise
stick to immediate unless stated.
Third, never ignore negative clues.
Overlooking statements like X is not
sitting with Y or A does not live on an
even floor are critical for elimination.
Fourth, never make assumptions, inferring
information not explicitly provided.
Stick, stick, lead to what is
given or logically derivable.
Fifth incomplete diagrams not
fully drawing the diagram or table
leading to mental overload and
errors in tracking information.
Lastly, not separating cases.
Trying to force multiple possibilities
into a single diagram, which often leads
to confusion and incorrect deductions.
Avoid bees and you'll solve like a pro.
WH framework summary.
Let's quickly summarize with
the WH framework, my friend.
What are puzzles, logic problems
requiring systematic arrangement or
correlation of entities based on clues?
Why learn them to assess
logical reasoning, analytical
skills, and attention to detail
crucial for banking roles.
When are they applied in situations
requiring structured thinking,
information organization, and
deductive problem solving?
Where are they essential in competitive
exams and job roles involving
data interpretation planning,
and strategic decision making?
Who needs this?
Your exam aspirants.
Banking professionals, data analysts,
and anyone needing critical thinking
skills and how do we solve them by
using diagrams, tables, systematic
elimination, case analysis, and
careful deduction from clues.
Fully worked out examples.
Let's see, some action.
My friend with fully worked out examples.
Example one box puzzle
question seven boxes.
P-Q-R-S-T-U-V are kept one
above another in a stack.
The lower most box is numbered one, and
the top most box is numbered seven clues.
Box R is kept on an
even numbered position.
Only two boxes are kept between R
and q. Q is kept above R, box B is
kept immediately below box S. Box
T is kept at the topmost position.
Box U is kept below.
Box V. V is not kept immediately
above R. How many boxes are kept
above box SA one B two, C3, D four.
Understand the question before
moving to explanation solution.
For example, one.
Step one, place T. Using the definite
clue there are seven positions,
one Bottom to seven top clue.
Five states T is at the top most
position Position seven T. Step two.
Place r and q using their related clues.
Clue one R is on an
even numbered position.
6, 4, 2, glue two.
Two boxes are between R and q.
Q3.
Q is above RQ, mt, Mt. R considering
R's, even positions, if R is at six,
Q would be at nine, not possible.
If R is at four, Q would be at seven, but
T is at seven, so this is a contradiction.
If R is at two, Q would be at five.
This is the only valid placement.
So position seven T, position five, Q,
position two, R, step three, place s
and P using their immediate relationship
glue four P is immediately below.
Box s. SP is a block.
Current occupied positions seven
T five Q2 R positions 6, 4, 3, 1.
We need two consecutive
empty slots for sp.
Possible.
R four comma three.
If S is at six, P would be at five, but
Q is at five so this is a contradiction.
Therefore, S must be
at four and P at three.
Current state position seven.
T. Position six.
Mt. Position five.
Q, position four s. Position three P.
Position two, R. Position one, empty.
Step four.
Place we and you using their
relationships and remaining constraints.
Clue.
Six U is below V. VU is a block V
immediately above U or with spaces clue.
Seven V is not kept immediately above.
R remaining empty positions.
Six.
One people left VU since U is below V.
V must be at six and U at one position.
Seven.
T. Position six V. Position five.
Q, position four S. Position three P.
Position two R. Position one U. Step five.
Final verification Clue one R
is on an even numbered position.
Two.
True clue two.
Two boxes between R and QPSR
between true clue three.
Q five is above R two.
True clue four.
P three is immediately below S four.
True clue.
Five.
T seven is at the top most position.
True glue six U one is below V six.
True glue seven V is not immediately
above R. T is immediately above R true.
All clues are satisfied.
The final arrangement from top
to bottom is T-V-Q-S-P-R-U.
Question how many boxes
are kept above box S?
Box S is at position four.
The boxes above S-R-Q-V-T, there are three
boxes above s correct answer is option C3.
Example two, linear seating arrangement.
Question five.
Friends, A, B, C, D, E are sitting in
a straight line facing south clues.
C sits exactly in the middle of the line.
D is an immediate neighbor of c. B. Sits
to the right of e. A is sitting at one of
the extreme ends of the line, who sits to
the immediate right of B-A-C-B-D-C-E-D?
No one understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
For example, two step one, place C.
Using the middle position clue there are
five positions in a straight line clue.
One C sits exactly in the middle.
So C is at position three.
Step two, place D. Using the
immediate neighbor, clue.
Clue.
Two.
D is an immediate neighbor of C at three.
So D can be at position
two or position four.
Step three, place A using the extreme end.
Clue.
Four A is sitting at
one of the extreme ends.
So A is at position one or position five.
Let's combine D and a placement case
1D at position two A at position one.
Current setup from left to right, a,
D, c, mt. Empty, empty positions, four,
five remaining people be E, step four,
place B and E, using their directional
relationship and finalize glue.
Three B sits to the right of e.
All facing south, so right means
towards a lower position number.
This means B is at a position
numerically smaller than E. Empty
positions are four, comma five, so
B must be at four and E at five.
Final arrangement from left to right, A,
D, C, B, E, step five, final verification.
Clue one C3 sits exactly in the middle.
True clue 2D two is an
immediate neighbor of C3.
True clue three B four sits to
the right of E five facing south.
B is at a lower number than E,
so B is to E right True clue.
Four A one is sitting at
one of the extreme ends.
True.
All clues are satisfied.
The final arrangement from left
to right is A-D-C-B-E question.
Who sits to the immediate right of B. B
is at position four, all are facing south.
Immediate, right means the position
with the next lower number.
The position immediately to
the right of B four is three.
C is at position three, correct?
Answer is option A, c. Example,
three day based scheduling puzzle.
Question five.
Friends, P-Q-R-S-T attend a yoga class
on five different days of the week,
starting from Monday and ending on Friday.
Clues R attends the class on Wednesday.
Only one person attends the class between
r and TT attends the class after RQ.
Attends the class immediately before p.
S does not attend the class on Tuesday.
Who attends the class on Friday?
A-P-B-Q-C-S-D-T Understand the
question before moving to explanation.
Solution.
For example, three step one, place
R. Using the definite day clue.
The days are Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday.
Clue one.
R attends the class on Wednesday.
Step two, place T using
its relationship with R.
Clue.
Two.
Only one person attends
between R and t. Clue.
Three T attends the class
after r. R is on Wednesday.
For T to be after R with one person
between them, T must be on Friday.
Step three, place Q and P using their
immediate relationship Clue four Q attends
the class immediately before P QP block.
Current empty days,
Monday, Tuesday, Thursday.
The only consecutive empty days for
the QP block are Monday and Tuesday.
So Q attends on Monday
and P attends on Tuesday.
Step four, place S using
the remaining constraint.
Clue five s does not attend
the class on Tuesday.
The only remaining empty day is
Thursday, so S must attend on Thursday.
Step five, final verification.
The final schedule is Monday Q Tuesday,
p Wednesday, r Thursday S Friday.
T Clue.
One R attends on Wednesday.
True clue.
Two.
Only one person attends between
r and TS is between true clue.
Three T Friday attends after r Wednesday.
True clue.
Four.
Q Monday attends immediately
before p Tuesday.
True clue five s does
not attend on Tuesday.
True.
All clues are satisfied.
Question.
Who attends the class on Friday?
T attends the class on Friday, correct?
Answer is option DT.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.